Hello everyone! In this lesson, we will look at the main way of logging in Unreal Engine - the UE_LOG macro.
Let's display the main types in the console, let's see how this console is opened through editor.
We are with you in the BaseGeometryActor .cpp file. Go to the
BeginPlay function . As we remember, it is called once when the game starts and we print UE_LOG.
This macro has several parameters. The first parameter is the name of the logging category.
In the next lesson, we will create our own logging category, now we will use the
temporary category, which is accessible from anywhere, it is reserved and called LogTemp.
The logging category is some kind of meta information, in fact it is an additional line that
is added to the output. Using it, we can filter the logs and understand from what place in the
program the message is printed. The next parameter is Verbosity or logging level.
There are several in Unreal, but the most common are display, warning, and error. Depending on
what is happening in the program, we can display either a normal message, a warning,
or an error. In the console also in the editor, this message will be highlighted in different colors.
The third parameter is the output line itself - a string literal. Let's print
Hello Unreal. We see that our macro is underlined with a red wavy line,
somewhere we made a mistake. UE_LOG does not allow simply passing a string , a
string literal. To do this, you need to use an additional macro called TEXT.
This macro is essentially a wrapper over a string and it returns an extended string, that is, if
we want to use unicode characters, write, for example, something in Cyrillic,
or in Chinese characters, then it will be enough to wrap the required line in the TEXT macro and that's
it. will be displayed correctly. If we fall into the TEXT macro by pressing F12, we will see
that TEXT define TEXT_PASTE, and TEXT_PASTE is a macro that concatenates the character L with our
string X. The double pound symbol in the preprocessor simply means concatenation of two arguments.
And the L prefix in C ++ means that the given string will be considered by the compiler as a wide string.
Copy our log by pressing Ctrl + D. Let's change the logging level. Let's print warning,
and in the third line error, to see how it looks in editor. Save,
click local windows degugger and wait for unreal to start.
To open the log window, we go to the main menu -> window -> developer tools -> output log.
As we can see in the log window, there is already technical information - these are the logs when starting editor. We
don't need them now. Let's clean them up. To do this, we right-click in the log window and select
clear log. That is, we have completely cleared the output window. Next, we check that
our actor exists in the object tree . If not, then drag & drop it onto the stage. And press the play button.
Scroll down and see that our logs are displayed in the console: display, warning and error. Also, at the beginning,
the log category, the log level and our messages directly are printed. In the upper left
corner we see the filters button. Click on it. We can sort everything by log level.
We can remove the display level. We are left with only warning and error, or only error. By selecting
categories from the menu, we can filter everything by category. We can remove the categories that we do not
need, or by clicking on show all, select only our LogTemp category.
We return with you to the code. Let's see how to log some of the basic types. Let's start with an integer.
WeaponsNum - the number of weapons. Let it be 4. Let's create another integer.
KillsNum - let it be seven. Further, the float type is a floating point number.
Let there be Health - life. There is some number here, no matter what. Let's display the boolean variable IsDead,
let it be false. Let's add another HasWeapon boolean variable. Let it be true.
We will use our UE_LOG macro. The category is still temporary - LogTemp.
Let the logging level be display, purely informative.
We write our macro TEXT.
We output here WeaponsNum, which equals .. which equals to something ..
We can specify format specifiers to the log, much like the printf functions in C ++ work.
For integers, this is% d or% i.
Let's add KillsNum and specify the i specifier - we'll exit in two different ways. Further
, the arguments are indicated, separated by commas, that is, our numbers, respectively.
WeaponsNum and KillsNum.
Copy the line of our macro (Ctrl + D). Change the output line
to Health. To display floating point numbers, the format specifier must be specified% f.
Change arguments to Health.
Copy the line again. We need to output the boolean variable IsDead.
This can be done in several ways. We will consider one of them later
when we go through the lines of the unreal engine, and now we will display it simply as an integer.
The compiler will automatically convert bool to int, that is, it will output either 0 or 1.
Let's add one more line of log for HasWeapon. We can explicitly tell the compiler
that we want to convert bool to int. Let's change the text .. HasWeapon ..
and also change the IsDead variable to HasWeapon.
And for explicit conversion to int we use static_cast
Specify int parameter and HasWeapon in parentheses.
Let's take a look at another floating point output. In the format specifier
, you can specify the precision with which we want to output the number.
For this, after% is indicated. and the number of decimal places.
We are saved. And go to editor.
Without closing the editor, we can compile everything on the fly
by clicking on the compile button located in the toolbar at the top.
Everything has been compiled for us. We open the log.
We clear all information (right-click - clear log) and press play.
Let's filter our log. Uncheck show all. Find our LogTemp.
We see with you, respectively, our previous lines of Hello Unreal
and also our entire output: WeaponsNum, KillsNum ..
Health in full and Health with an accuracy of two characters.
Also the boolean variable IsDead = 0, HasWeapon = 1, which corresponds to false and true. We press stop
and return to the code. Let's create a function in which we put all the code with BeginPlay. Go
to the .h file. We create a private section. Let's call our function printtypes and put all the code
related to output to the console there. Right click on printtypes,
select quick actions and refactoring. Click on create declaration / definition.
And our function body is automatically added to the .cpp file.
We remove all our output from BeginPlay.
We insert it into the body of the printtypes function.
These variables naturally do not make any sense, they are purely for training. We also remove
the Hello Unreal pins - we don't need them. And let's add a call to the printtypes function below the comment.
Let's take a look at the last point. Let's open the folder where our project is located.
Go to the saved folder, then to the logs folder.
This directory stores editor logs. A new log is created every time it starts.
The current log is named the same as our project,
and the previous one additionally has a timestamp when it was launched.
Let's open the log. I open it in Visual Studio Code, but of course you can
use any other text editor. If we open the search (Ctr + F) and enter LogTemp in the
search field, we will see that all the information has also been output to this text file.
This is very convenient because this file can be analyzed without opening editor.